i wrote this book because it was not
there
it seemed to me that there was an
incredible vacuum in scholarship but
also in the in the in the human history
of this incredible elemental disease
that was engulfing our lives that is
engulfing our lives today engulfing our
societies has had a deep influence on
our culture and yet if if you know there
are 5 000 books on cancer and yet there
was not a single book which addressed uh
the the history of this disease and its
future to some extent in the way that i
wanted it to be addressed well cbc1 has
a particularly uh
inflammatory situation
in all of medicine but in cancer
um in particular
between patients who are desperate and
will try anything right and doctors who
with a sort of mixture of perhaps good
and bad motives you know will also try
anything they they want they want to
help their patients they're looking for
medical glory yeah a place in the
history books and and this is a very
dangerous combination because it leads
to
excesses of the kind you describe both
with radical surgery and with
chemotherapy right don't you think this
is
this is still in operation right now and
how do we
control it and be sure that we're not
putting
the public and patients through an
unnecessary harmful procedures but
cancer is a metaphorical disease in in a
very deep way
and we talked a little bit about it the
word cancer comes from crab the reason
is that hippocrates thought that cancer
he thought that these tumors which were
sitting under the skin with blood
vessels around them reminded him of a
crab
of a crab crawling under the skin and
this peculiar natural movement
the reason i bring this up of course is
that the metaphor of war
very quickly permeated uh cancer one of
the things that i discovered in this
book was of course that the very first
chemotherapies came from war gases and
the reason was because uh during the
bombings of the of barry for instance
the barry harbor
pathologists discovered that war gases
were able to
decimate the white blood cells and leave
the rest of the body
injured but not decimated and and
therefore there was a the idea that if
you could use that war gas in a slightly
different manner you could kill
malignant white blood cells and so forth
that's just one example of how literally
chemotherapy and candy cancer therapy
grows out of metaphors of war now these
metaphors of course then become very
much part of the consciousness of the
doctor and the patient it's not just one
both doctors and patients want to fight
the battle right and
in that moment of fighting the war on
cancer fighting battling your own body
of course it's very hard to say well now
let's stop let's retreat the front uh
let's move backwards um and and
therefore this this
this dense idea of this dense
metaphorical idea of fighting cancer
still permeates our culture
what is the mechanism by which we ever
gain knowledge in medicine the the
incredible irony in medicine of course
is that
it pretends to have certainty because
every medical decision is about
certainty it is about telling someone
you know let's do this and that because
i expect this or that to occur and yet
of course is the discipline
fundamentally rooted in uncertainty so
every measure of progress furrows its
way through the lives and bodies of
patients that's that's that's that's the
sad story about medicine and yet of
course progress has to be made this is a
lovely line from susan sontag who says
um my purpose was not to inflame
imagination but rather to calm it
i felt if this book is successful it
would demystify one of the fundamental
mysteries
of illness that happens to be a part of
our times it it will succeed
if it is able to demystify something
that's mysterious and in that sense it
will calm the imagination because it's
only by understanding that our
imagination can get calmed
thank you
you